Hosting models/render modes & What's New 8.0 (#30279)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/fundamentals/render-modes.md

---
title: ASP.NET Core Blazor render modes
author: guardrex
description: Learn about Blazor render modes and how to apply them in Blazor Web Apps.
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-8.0'
ms.author: riande
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 09/08/2023
uid: blazor/fundamentals/render-modes
---
# ASP.NET Core Blazor render modes

This article explains control of Razor component rendering in Blazor Web Apps, either at compile time or runtime.

> ## Render modes

Reviewer: We should recommend that component authors implement components to be render mode agnostic. It should typically be possible to use a component with any render mode. The app developer generally decides what render mode to use for a given component using the `@rendermode` directive on the component instance.

The main exception to this is when defining a page. To specify the render mode for an entire page you need to use the `@attribute` directive and the corresponding render mode attribute. But since pages are typically defined by app developers, not library authors, it's still the app developer that is in control of the render mode.

This doc currently focuses heavily on the render mode attributes. But given the above guidance it would be more appropriate to focus on using the `@rendermode` directive instead of tying a component's definition to a specific render mode.

> This article explains how to establish hosting models for rendered Razor components in Blazor Web Apps, either at compile time or runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article explains how to control how Razor components are rendered in Blazor Web Apps, either at compile time or runtime.
```

Author: ```suggestion
This article explains control of Razor component rendering in Blazor Web Apps, either at compile time or runtime.
```

> Every component in a Blazor Web App adopts a *render mode* to determine the hosting model that it uses, where it's rendered, and whether or not it's interactive with C# code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every component in a Blazor Web App adopts a *render mode* to determine the hosting model that it uses, where it's rendered, and whether or not it's interactive.
```

> The following table shows the four potential render mode scenarios for rendering Razor components in a Blazor Web App. The render mode attributes in the *Render mode attribute* column are applied to components with the [`@attribute` Razor directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute). Later in this article, examples are shown for each render mode scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows the available render modes for rendering Razor components in a Blazor Web App. To apply a render mode to a component use the `@rendermode` directive on the component instance, or use the [`@attribute` Razor directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) with the corresponding render mode attribute on the component type. Later in this article, examples are shown for each render mode scenario.
```

> The following table shows the four potential render mode scenarios for rendering Razor components in a Blazor Web App. The render mode attributes in the *Render mode attribute* column are applied to components with the [`@attribute` Razor directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute). Later in this article, examples are shown for each render mode scenario.

Reviewer: The Server, WebAssembly, and Auto render modes also have prerendered variants.

Reviewer: Also, just a heads up, that in RC2 we will get Razor compiler support for the new `@rendermode` directive: https://github.com/dotnet/razor/issues/9068.

Author: That will ... ***should be*** 🤞🍀 ... an easy find-'n-replace gesture for me when the time comes.

Reviewer: Prerendering is enabled by default for all render models in .NET 8. To turn it off you do this: `@attribute [RenderModeServer(prerender: false)]` or `@rendermode="new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)"`

Author: Ah ... yeah. I knew about that, but this whole doc is whatever was on my mind while typing. I'll add that in the morning.

Scenario                      | Render mode attribute     | Hosting model                             | Render location     | Interactive
----------------------------- | :-----------------------: | :---------------------------------------: | :-----------------: | :---------:
Statically-rendered           | None                      | None                                      | Server              | ❌

> *Server-side rendering (SSR)* | `[RenderModeServer]`      | Blazor Server                             | Server              | ✔️

Reviewer: This is different than how most other frontend web frameworks refer to the SSR. Typically SSR means the component is rendered statically in response to a request. For us, the Server render model means Blazor Server, which is connected, stateful, and interactive.

Reviewer: I do agree though that Blazor Server is a form of server-side rendering, which is the source of confusion you pointed out in our email discussion. We're considering if we should rename the Server render mode to InteractiveServer and if we should add the same Interactive prefix to the other interactive render modes.

Author: I suppose the changes are to ...

* Server render mode
* WebAssembly render mode

... and update the headings later in the doc to match.

> Scenario              | Render mode attribute     | Hosting model                             | Render location     | Interactive
> --------------------- | :-----------------------: | :---------------------------------------: | :-----------------: | :---------:
> Statically-rendered   | None                      | None                                      | Server              | ❌
> Server render mode    | `[RenderModeServer]`      | Blazor Server                             | Server              | ✔️
> Client render mode    | `[RenderModeWebAssembly]` | Blazor WebAssembly                        | Client              | ✔️
> Determined at runtime | `[RenderModeAuto]`        | Blazor Server,<br>then Blazor WebAssembly | Server, then client | ✔️

Reviewer: I think this table would be clearer if it was organized a little differently:

```suggestion
Name | Description  |  Render location     | Interactive
--------------------- | :-----------------------: | :---------------------------------------: | :-----------------: | :---------:
Static  | Static server rendering |  Server  | ❌
Server    | Interactive server rendering using Blazor Server | Server  | ✔️
WebAssembly | Interactive client rendering using Blazor WebAssembly | Client  | ✔️
Auto | Interactive client rendering using Blazor Server initially and then WebAssembly on subsequent visits once download | Server, then client | ✔️
```

<!-- HOLD for final commit - We'll use accessible markup for the ❌ and ✔️:
<span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">No</span>
<span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Yes</span>
-->

The following examples demonstrate setting the component's render mode with a few basic Razor component features.

To test the render mode behaviors locally, you can place the following components in an app created from the *Blazor Web App* project template. When you create the app, select the checkboxes (Visual Studio) or apply the CLI options (.NET CLI) to enable both server-side and client-side interactivity. For guidance on how to create a Blazor Web App, see <xref:blazor/tooling>.

> ### Statically-rendered on the server without user interactivity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Static server rendering
```

> In the following example, there's no designation for the component's render mode. Therefore, the component is *statically rendered* on the server. The button isn't interactive and doesn't call the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` doesn't change, and the component isn't re-rendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default components use the Static render mode. In the following example, there's no designation for the component's render mode. Therefore, the component is *statically rendered* on the server. The component renders to the response stream and interactivity is not enabled. The button isn't interactive and doesn't call the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` doesn't change, and the component isn't re-rendered in response to UI events.
```

`RenderMode1.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-1"

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

> If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the server-side project's `Components/Pages` folder. The server-side project is the solution's project with a name that doesn't end in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-1` in the browser's address bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the server-side project's `Components/Pages` folder. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-1` in the browser's address bar.
```

> [!NOTE]
> The anatomy of a basic Razor component is fully explained in the <xref:blazor/fundamentals/index> article. Project structure for apps created by a Blazor template are described in the <xref:blazor/project-structure> article. Detailed components coverage is found in the *Components* articles later in the documentation.

### Server render mode

> Server render mode results in rendering a component on the server with interactivity over a SignalR connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Server render mode will render the component interactively from the server using Blazor Server. User interactions are handled over a SignalR connection.
```

> In the following example, the render mode is set to use the Blazor Server hosting model with `@attribute [RenderModeServer]`. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is re-rendered to update the message in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the render mode is set to Server by adding `@attribute [RenderModeServer]` to the component definition. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is re-rendered to update the message in the UI.
```

`RenderMode2.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-2"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the server-side project's `Components/Pages` folder. The server-side project is the solution's project with a name that doesn't end in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-2` in the browser's address bar.

### Client render mode

> Client render mode results in rendering a component on the client with interactivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Client render mode renders the component interactively on the client using Blazor WebAssembly.
```

In the following example, the render mode is set to use the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model with `@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]`. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is re-rendered to update the message in the UI.

`RenderMode3.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-3"
@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the client-side project's `Pages` folder. The client-side project is the solution's project with a name that ends in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-3` in the browser's address bar.

> ### Render mode determined at runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Auto render mode
```

> The render mode can be determined at runtime. The component is initially rendered server-side with interactivity using the Blazor Server hosting model. After the Blazor bundle is downloaded to the client and the .NET client-side runtime activates, the component adopts the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model for client-side rendering and interactivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Auto render mode determines how to render the component at runtime. The component is initially rendered server-side with interactivity using the Blazor Server hosting model. The Blazor WebAssembly runtime and app bundle is downloaded to the client in the background and cached so that it can be used instead on future visits.
```

> In the following example, the component is interactive throughout the process. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is re-rendered, either server-side or client-side, to update the message in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the component is interactive throughout the process. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is re-rendered to update the message in the UI. Initially the component is rendered interactively from the server, but on subsequent visits it is rendered from the client once the Blazor WebAssembly runtime and app bundle have been downloaded and cached.
```

`RenderMode4.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-4"
@attribute [RenderModeAuto]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the client-side project's `Pages` folder. The client-side project is the solution's project with a name that ends in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-4` in the browser's address bar.

> ## Render mode propagation

Reviewer: We need to also state that you can't switch to a different interactive render mode in a child component. For example, a Server component can't be a child of a WebAssembly component.

Also parameters passed to an interactive child component from a Static parent must be JSON serializable. The means you can't pass render fragments or child content from a Static parent component to an interactive child component.

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a statically-rendered parent component, the `SharedMessage` component is also rendered statically and isn't interactive. The button doesn't call `UpdateMessage`, and the message isn't updated.

`PassedRenderMode1.razor`:

```razor
@page "/passed-render-mode-1"

<SharedMessage />
```

If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a server-rendered component, it adopts server-side rendering. The `SharedMessage` component is interactive over a SignalR connection to the client. The button calls `UpdateMessage`, and the message is updated.

`PassedRenderMode2.razor`:

```razor
@page "/passed-render-mode-2"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<SharedMessage />
```

If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a client-rendered component, it adopts client-side rendering. The `SharedMessage` component is interactive on the client with the .NET WebAssembly-based runtime. The button calls `UpdateMessage`, and the message is updated.

`PassedRenderMode3.razor`:

```razor
@page "/passed-render-mode-3"
@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]

<SharedMessage />
```

> If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a dynamically-rendered component, where the render mode is determined at runtime, it adopts server-side rendering initially, then client-side rendering after the component and Blazor bundle are downloaded and the .NET runtime activates on the client. The component is interactive. The button calls `UpdateMessage`, and the message is updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a component using the Auto render mode, it adopts the Auto render mode as well. It adopts server-side rendering initially, then client-side rendering after the component and Blazor bundle are downloaded and the .NET runtime activates on the client. The component is interactive. The button calls `UpdateMessage`, and the message is updated.
```

`PassedRenderMode4.razor`:

```razor
@page "/passed-render-mode-4"
@attribute [RenderModeAuto]

<SharedMessage />
```

## Set the render mode for the entire app

> To set the render mode for the entire app, indicate the render mode at the highest level component in the app's component hierarchy, typically the `Routes` component (`Components/Routes.razor`) for apps based on the Blazor Web App project template:

Reviewer: We will provide a template option in RC2 on the Blazor Web App template for setting this up for you: https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/50433

> To set the render mode for the entire app, indicate the render mode at the highest level component in the app's component hierarchy, typically the `Routes` component (`Components/Routes.razor`) for apps based on the Blazor Web App project template:

Reviewer: I think we might also need to say something about how the Router propagates it's render mode to the pages it routes too. The pages are not child components of the router - they are discovered at runtime - but the pages I believe do inherit the render mode from the router.

```razor
@attribute {RENDER MODE}

<Router AppAssembly="@typeof(App).Assembly" ...>
    <Found Context="routeData">
        <RouteView RouteData="@routeData" DefaultLayout="@typeof(Layout.MainLayout)" />
        <FocusOnNavigate RouteData="@routeData" Selector="h1" />
    </Found>
</Router>
```

In the preceding example, the `{RENDER MODE}` placeholder is the render mode (`[RenderModeServer]`, `[RenderModeWebAssembly]`, or `[RenderModeAuto]`). The render mode propagates down the component hierarchy to all of the components in the app.

> ## API extensions that support components in Blazor Web Apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enable support for interactive render modes
```

Reviewer: Should this section go earlier in the doc? The above samples won't work if you haven't enabled the appropriate render modes.

> The following extensions are automatically applied to apps created from the [*Blazor Web App* project template](xref:blazor/tooling) when either or both of server-side component interactivity and client-side component interactivity are enabled during app creation. Individual components are still required to declare their render mode per the [*Render modes*](#render-modes) section after the component services and endpoints are configured in the app's `Program` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Blazor Web App must be configured to support interactive render modes. The following extensions are automatically applied to apps created from the [*Blazor Web App* project template](xref:blazor/tooling) when either or both of server-side component interactivity and client-side component interactivity are enabled during app creation. Individual components are still required to declare their render mode per the [*Render modes*](#render-modes) section after the component services and endpoints are configured in the app's `Program` file.
```

## Enable support for interactive render modes

A Blazor Web App must be configured to support interactive render modes. The following extensions are automatically applied to apps created from the *Blazor Web App* project template during app creation. Individual components are still required to declare their render mode per the [*Render modes*](#render-modes) section after the component services and endpoints are configured in the app's `Program` file.

Services for Razor components are added by calling <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.RazorComponentsServiceCollectionExtensions.AddRazorComponents%2A>.

Component builder extensions:

* <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.RazorComponentsBuilderExtensions.AddServerComponents%2A> adds services to support rendering interactive server components.

> * `AddWebAssemblyComponents` adds services to support rendering interactive WebAssembly components.

Reviewer: @mkArtakMSFT It looks like the ASP.NET Core API ref docs for .NET 8 area a bit old (Preview 5), which is why the API ref link for `AddWebAssemblyComponents` can't be added yet. Do we know what the process is for getting them updated?

Example 1: The following `Program` file API adds services and a render mode for Razor components with only server-side rendering support:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddServerComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddServerRenderMode();
```

Example 2: The following `Program` file API adds services and a render mode for Razor components with only client-side rendering support:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddWebAssemblyComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddWebAssemblyRenderMode();
```

Example 3: The following `Program` file API adds services and render modes for Razor components with both server-side and client-side rendering support:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddServerComponents()
    .AddWebAssemblyComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddServerRenderMode()
    .AddWebAssemblyRenderMode();
```

## Apply a render mode

> ### Routable page components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Apply a render mode to a component definition
```

Reviewer: This should be covered after the section on applying a render mode to a component instance, which is the more common case.

> To specify the render mode for an entire page, use the [`@attribute` Razor directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) and the corresponding render mode attribute. But since pages are typically defined by app developers, not library authors, it's still the app developer that is in control of the render mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To specify the render mode for an entire page, use the [`@attribute` Razor directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) and the corresponding render mode attribute.
```

```razor
@page "{ROUTE}"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]
```

> In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is most commonly used when applying a render mode to a specific page or to specify that a component requires a specific render mode.

> [!NOTE]
> Component authors should typically design components to support any render mode or hosting model. Components should avoid assumptions on where they are running (server or client) and should degrade gracefully when rendered statically.

In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.
```

> ### Non-routable, non-page components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Apply a render mode to a component instance
```

Reviewer: I think this should be the first subsection in the "Apply a render mode" section. Applying a render mode to a component definition is really the exceptional case.

> Typically, non-routable, non-page components don't apply a render mode with an [`@attribute` directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute), which means that they're created render mode agnostic. The developer usually applies the render mode using the [`@rendermode` Razor directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) where the component is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply a render mode to a component instance use the [`@rendermode` Razor directive attribute](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) where the component is used.
```

> In the following example, the `Dialog` component doesn't specify a render mode. The render mode is applied where the `Dialog` component is used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the Server render mode is applied to the `Dialog` component instance:
```

> Auto        | `new AutoRenderMode()`
>
> The preceding syntax will be simplified in an upcoming preview release.

### Prerendering

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 RC2: Remove preview remark and update code -->

Prerendering is enabled by default for interactive components.

To disable prerendering, pass the `prerender` flag with a value of `false`.

For a routable page:

```razor
@page "{ROUTE}"
@attribute [RenderModeServer(prerender: false)]
```

In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.

For a non-routable, non-page component:

```razor
<Dialog @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)" />
```

> [!NOTE]
> During .NET 8 *Release Candidate 1*, use the following values:
>
> Render mode | Value
> ----------- | -----
> Server      | `new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)`
> WebAssembly | `new WebAssemblyRenderMode(prerender: false)`
> Auto        | `new AutoRenderMode(prerender: false)`
>
> The preceding syntax will be simplified in an upcoming preview release.

### Static render mode

By default components use the Static render mode. The component renders to the response stream and interactivity isn't enabled.

> In the following example, there's no designation for the component's render mode. Therefore, the component is *statically rendered* on the server. The button isn't interactive and doesn't call the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` doesn't change, and the component isn't rerendered in response to UI events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, there's no designation for the component's render mode and the component inherits the default render mode from its parent. Therefore, the component is *statically rendered* on the server. The button isn't interactive and doesn't call the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` doesn't change, and the component isn't rerendered in response to UI events.
```

`RenderMode1.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-1"

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the server-side project's `Components/Pages` folder. The server-side project is the solution's project with a name that doesn't end in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-1` in the browser's address bar.

> [!NOTE]

> > The anatomy of a basic Razor component is fully explained in the <xref:blazor/fundamentals/index> article. Project structure for apps created by a Blazor template are described in the <xref:blazor/project-structure> article. Detailed components coverage is found in the *Components* articles later in the documentation.

Reviewer: Do we need to repeat these instructions in every section? It distracts from the main content. There are instructions at the top of the doc on how to run and test the samples locally.

Author: No ... and it could be removed. This is a bit of a holdover from when I had the *Render modes* topic sitting directly under the *Hosting Models* topic in the ToC. That wasn't so good because it made the components in this topic the first ones that devs saw.

It's still an open question if this whole topic should go between the *Fundamenals* and *Components* node. That might be ok now because we won't show a render mode in (or most of) the component examples in the *Fundamentals* node after RC2.

Author: ..... or go back to placing it under the *Hosting Models* article ..... or place it as the first topic in the *Components* node under the overview there. I'm not sure what the absolute best spot is. It's certainly more flexible now that render modes don't need to be explained for early examples where it would be present without explanation (after RC2).

Author: I just removed that NOTE.

Reviewer: > or go back to placing it under the Hosting Models article

By "under" do you mean after or nested?

Author: I meant after the *Hosting Models* article, but that location still suffers a bit from readers not learning more about components first.

The main reason that I moved it was to get it immediately after where components are first explained. They're first explained in the *Fundamentals* overview because other *Fundamentals* node topics have component examples in them. However, the *Fundamentals* node is full of app-level concerns ... routing, logging, error handling, etc. Render modes seems more component-focused. How about as the first article after the *Components* node overview? That's at least a better option now that I know we won't (after RC2) be placing a render mode at the top of every page component example.

Reviewer: > How about as the first article after the Components node overview

That sounds fine. I'm pretty flexible on where the topic goes in the TOC. as long as it's in a reasonable place in the hierarchy. Right now, I think the Blazor docs are more hierarchical than sequential.

Author: Ok, sounds good.

Author: > hierarchical than sequential.

I know that readers read them straight down the ToC. Many have told me so over the years. It's logical, too, coming into the whole framework knowing nothing about it.

### Server render mode

> The Server render mode renders the component interactively from the server using Blazor Server. User interactions are handled over a SignalR connection.

Reviewer: In RC1 the circuit will stick around after it's created. In RC2 we'll need to add that the circuit will get cleaned up after the last Server component on the page has been removed with a configurable timeout: https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pull/50170

```suggestion
The Server render mode renders the component interactively from the server using Blazor Server. User interactions are handled over a real-time connection with the browser. The circuit connection will be established when the Server component is rendered.
```

In the following example, the render mode is set to Server by adding `@attribute [RenderModeServer]` to the component definition. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI.

`RenderMode2.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-2"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the server-side project's `Components/Pages` folder. The server-side project is the solution's project with a name that doesn't end in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-2` in the browser's address bar.

### Client render mode

> The Client render mode renders the component interactively on the client using Blazor WebAssembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Client render mode renders the component interactively on the client using Blazor WebAssembly. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded when the WebAssembly component is initially rendered and is then cached for future use.
```

In the following example, the render mode is set to use the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model with `@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]`. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI.

`RenderMode3.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-3"
@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the client-side project's `Pages` folder. The client-side project is the solution's project with a name that ends in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-3` in the browser's address bar.

### Auto render mode

> The Auto render mode determines how to render the component at runtime. The component is initially rendered server-side with interactivity using the Blazor Server hosting model. The Blazor WebAssembly runtime and app bundle are downloaded to the client in the background and cached so that they can be used on future visits.
> 
> In the following example, the component is interactive throughout the process. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI. Initially, the component is rendered interactively from the server, but on subsequent visits it's rendered from the client after the Blazor WebAssembly runtime and app bundle are downloaded and cached.

Reviewer: Sorry, I changed my mind on this: let's use ".NET runtime" instead of "Blazor WebAssembly runtime"

```suggestion
The Auto render mode determines how to render the component at runtime. The component is initially rendered server-side with interactivity using the Blazor Server hosting model. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded to the client in the background and cached so that they can be used on future visits.

In the following example, the component is interactive throughout the process. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI. Initially, the component is rendered interactively from the server, but on subsequent visits it's rendered from the client after the .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded and cached.
```

`RenderMode4.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-4"
@attribute [RenderModeAuto]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the client-side project's `Pages` folder. The client-side project is the solution's project with a name that ends in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-4` in the browser's address bar.

> ## Render mode propagation

Reviewer: Can we add a few more example to this section?:

1. A parent component with two child sibling component that use different render modes
2. A negative case of a child component that tries to use a different interactive render mode than its parent, which results in an error
3. A parent component with an interactive child component that takes a parameter that is serializable (works)
4. A negative case of an interactive child component that has a non-serializable component parameter, like child content or a render fragment, which results in an error. Show that you can sometimes work around this by wrapping the child component in another component that doesn't have the parameter. This is what we do in the Blazor Web App template with the Routes component.

> Render modes propagate down the component hierarchy. Consider the following non-routable, non-page `SharedMessage` component for use in other components. The render mode agnostic `SharedMessage` component doesn't apply a render mode with an [`@attribute` directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute).

Reviewer: I think it would help to lead with all the propagation rules.

```suggestion
Render modes propagate down the component hierarchy.

Rules for applying render modes:

* The default render mode is Static. 
* The interactive Server, WebAssembly, and Auto render modes can all be used from a Static component including using different render modes for sibling components. 
* You can't switch to a different interactive render mode in a child component. For example, a Server component can't be a child of a WebAssembly component.
* Parameters passed to an interactive child component from a Static parent must be JSON serializable. This means that you can't pass render fragments or child content from a Static parent component to an interactive child component.

Consider the following non-routable, non-page `SharedMessage` component for use in other components. The render mode agnostic `SharedMessage` component doesn't apply a render mode with an [`@attribute` directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute).
```

`SharedMessage.razor`:

```razor
<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a statically-rendered parent component, the `SharedMessage` component is also rendered statically and isn't interactive. The button doesn't call `UpdateMessage`, and the message isn't updated.

`PassedRenderMode1.razor`:

```razor
@page "/passed-render-mode-1"

<SharedMessage />
```

If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a component that defines the render mode, it inherits the applied render mode.

In the following example, the `SharedMessage` component is interactive over a SignalR connection to the client. The button calls `UpdateMessage`, and the message is updated.

`PassedRenderMode2.razor`:

```razor
@page "/passed-render-mode-2"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<SharedMessage />
```

> Additional rules for applying render modes:
> 
> * You can't switch to a different interactive render mode in a child component. For example, a Server component can't be a child of a WebAssembly component.
> * Parameters passed to an interactive child component from a Static parent must be JSON serializable. This means that you can't pass render fragments or child content from a Static parent component to an interactive child component.

Reviewer: I suggest above to move this to the beginning of the section.

```suggestion
```
